# Introduction

## 1.1 Forward
To my readers,

This is a guide to help others learn the basics of C++. I cannot consider myself 
an expert in the  subject, but I hope to able to effectively teach my readers the
bare bones of this language. And on a lesser note, this is a great way for me to 
review C++ during the summer.

I hope that you find this guide helpful and useful in some capacity. Know that there
so much more to programming and C++ than the topics I will cover in this guide. I
honestly believe that the best way for you to learn is for you to go out a simply
try different things. Experiment with some code. Build some interesting programs.
Go beyond what you have learned here.

I wish you all good luck in your journey to the world of programming.

Happy coding,

Thomas Kaneshige
UCLA `22

---

## 1.2 General Guidelines

Before we even start writing any code, I just want to take some time to go over
some general principles in C++. The first thing we will cover is the semicolon.

When you write sentences in English, you end every sentence with a period. In the
same way, in C++, every statement you make should end in a semicolon, like so:

```C++
<insert code statement here> ; <-----
```

---

From time to time in my examples, you will see me use the following:

```C++
This is a single-line comment
//

This is a multi-line comment
/* 
<insert some statement here>
<insert some statement here>
<insert some statement here> 
*/
```

These are comments. They are not coding statements in and of themselves (they have
no effect on the actual output of the program); they are simply meant to clarify and
explain particularly complicated parts of a program. In this guide, I will use comments
to help explain the examples I give.