# 2. Variables

## 2.1 Introduction

Variable are essential to any programming language are variables. In C++, all 
variables are declared in the same format: 

```
<variable type> <variable name> = <variable value> ;
```

This basically tells the compiler the type of the variable, the way we will 
reference the variable, and what the value the variable will have. One can 
leave a variable uninitialized like so:

```
<variable type> <variable name> ;
```

It is not good practice to use a program that may use and/or depend on
uninitialized variables. For example, an uninitialized integer variable will not
automatically be given the value 0, as some might assume. Assuming that the 
default integer is 0 may lead to unexpected consequences when attempting to run
your program. So, as a general rule of thumb, always try to initialize your variables.

Now that we have a basic understanding of how variables work and are defined,
let us look into some of the variable types that are available to us in C++.

---

## 2.2 Variable Types

There are only a few basic types of variables found in C++.

---

### The *int* data type

The int value is an integer value, or a positive or negative **whole** number. 
It is declared as follows:

```C++
int num1 = 0;
```

To declare a negative value, simply add a minus (-) to the front of your value:

```C++
int num2 = -1;
```

Something to note about int variables (and all numerical variables for that matter)
is that there is a maximum and minimum value that an integer variable can hold. Going 
past these values can result in unexpected behavior from a program. Luckily, integer 
values can range from about -2,000,000,000 to about 2,000,000,000, so as long as you 
are not dealing with extremely large values, you should be fine. 

---

### The *float* data type

The float value is a floating-point value, or a positive or negative number that 
contains a fractional portion. It is declared as follows:

```C++
float num = 1.1;
```

Similar to int variables, float variables also have a minimum and maximum value, but
those values are even greater than that of ints; floats can range from 10^-38 to 10^38
approximately. 

Since floats also contain fractional values, they have a characteristic called 
*precision*. If you have any experience with sig figs in any STEM class, you 
understand what precision is. If not, it basically is a measure of how many digits 
contained in a value is considered accurate. For example, if a number has a precision
of 5, then up to 5 digits of that number are considered accurate. Floats have a 
precision of 7 digits.

---

### The *double* and *long double* data type

The double and long double value are similar to the floating point value, except they 
come with a greater maximum and minimum value range as well as greater precision.

For reference, the double ranges from 10^-308 to 10^308 with a precision of 15 digits,
while the long double ranges from 10^-4932 to 10^4932 with a precision of 19 digits.

---

### The *bool* data type

The bool value is a boolean value, which holds a binary value, generally referred
to as "true" or "false". It is declared as follows:

```C++
bool trueFlag1 = true;
bool falseFlag1 = false;
```

Booleans can also be initialized using integers. 0 represents a "false" value, 
while anything other than 0 represents a "true" value. Here is an example:

```C++
bool trueFlag2 = 1;     // true
bool falseFlag2 = 0;    // false
```

Generally speaking, when you initialize any boolean value, try to use "true" or
"false" to do so - it makes reading your code much easier.

---

### The *char* data type

The char variable is a character variable, which - as it sounds - can hold a
character value. It is declared as follows:

```C++
char var1 = 'a';
```

Please be sure to note the **single quotes** surround the character; this makes
a difference. If we were to instead do the following:

```C++
char var2 = "a";   // Don't do this!
```

The compiler would treat the char variable var2 as a character array (or a *string*),
instead of a single character. To give more information, the compiler will treat var2
as a series of characters; namely, the character 'a' and the null-terminating character,
'\0' (more on this later). 

Character variables also translate into integers, which can be different depending on 
what encoding scheme your machine uses. Most machines use a character encoding
scheme known as ASCII. For more infomation on ASCII values, use the link below:

[ASCII Table](https://i.pinimg.com/originals/75/28/b1/7528b199208cc9078adfa6830be7f072.jpg)

---