# 3. Operators

## 3.1 Introduction

With our understanding of the different types of variables, we now turn as to
how we can manipulate those variables. 

---

## 3.2 Basic Operators

As one might expect, in C++, we are given the four basic arithmetic operations. 
In case you forgot what those operations were, here they are:

1. Addition: Use the "+" operator
2. Subtraction: Use the "-" operator
3. Multiplication: Use the "*" operator
4. Division: Use the "/" operator

Here are some examples of these operators in action:

```C++
int num1 = 1;
int num2 = 1;

int sum = num1 + num2;
int diff = num1 - num2;
int product = num1 * num2;
int quotient = num1 / num2;

cout << sum << " " << diff << " " << product << " " << quotient << endl;
```

This will produce the output:

```
2 0 1 1
```

---

## 3.3 More on Division

Of all the operators, division exhibits some interesting behaviors depending on the
type of variables performed on. Consider the following situation:

```C++
int num = 10 / 5;
```

It is easy to see what the variable "num" will be equal to here in this situation; it
will hold the value 2. But what happens when we try this piece of code?

```C++
int num1 = 10 / 6;
int num2 = 10 / 7;
```

The result of this operation will actually set "num1" and "num2" equal to 1. Why? 
Since both "num1" and "num2" are integer types, the fractional portions of both
divisions will be dropped. This also means that 10/6, 10/7, 10/8, 10/9, and 10/10 will 
all yield the value 1, since 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 all go into 10 at most 1 time.

If you want a fractional portion in your number, use a float or double variable. Those 
will not truncate your fractional portions.

In addition, if you can recall to your fourth grade years, you should recall doing 
division with something called remainders. In C++, we have the "%" operator, or the
modulo operator. The modulo operator performs a divsion and returns the remainder of
the operation. Here is an example:

```C++
int remainder = 0;

remainder = 9 % 7;
```

In this case, the integer variable "remainder" will be given the value "2", since 7 goes
into 9 once, with 2 left over.

---

## 3.4 Other Operators

Aside from the five operators mentioned above, there are also the "++" (increment) and
"--" (decrement) operators. These operators increase or decrease a value by 1, respectively.
Here is how you might use it:

```C++
int increaseMe = 0;
int decreaseMe = 0;

increaseMe++;
decreaseMe++;
```

These operations would give the variable "increaseMe" a value of 1 and the variable 
"decreaseMe" a value of -1.

The "++" and "--" operator can only increment and decrement a value by 1 however. If we
want to alter a value by any more than 1, we would need to use the "+=" and "-=" operator.
It would look something like this:

```C++
int num1 = 0;
int num2 = 5;

num1 += 6;
num2 -= 3;
```

This would give the variable "num1" a value of 6 and the variable of "num2" a value of 2.
In addition, you can also use the "*=", "/=", and "%=" operators in the same fashion, to
either multiply, divide, or modulo to the same effect.

---

## 3.5 Comparison Operators

In C++, we can also use comparison operators such as greater than (>) and less than (<).
These operators return a binary value (either 0 or 1), which indicates "true" and "false".
For example:

```
35 < 40 -> Returns true, because 35 is less than 40.
35 > 40 -> Returns false, because 35 is not greater than 40.
```

The operators less-than-or-equal-to and greater-than-or-equal-to are represented by 
either "<" or ">" followed by a "=". For a better description, they would look something
like this:

```
<= -> "Less-than-or-equal-to"
>= -> "Greater-than-or-equal-to"
```

"Equals" is also special. We cannot use the "=" sign, since that already has a use in 
C++ (It is called the *assignment operator*). Instead, we use the "==" sign to signify
the "equal" comparison.

There is another operator that is used in C++ comparisons. The exclamation mark (!) is 
used in C++ to reverse the result of a comparison. So, for example:

```
!(35 < 40) -> Returns false, because 35 is less than 40, but the result is reversed by
the "!" operator.

!(35 > 40) -> Returns true, because 35 is not less than 40, but the result is reversed
by the "!" operator.
```

The "!" operator can also be used in conjunction with the "=" operator to create the 
"not-equal" comparison. It works as follows:

```
35 != 40 -> Returns true, because 35 is not equal to 40.
35 != 35 -> Returns false, because 35 is equal to 35.
```

---

## 3.6 Precedence of Operators

Just like in normal math, there is an order of operations. In C++, there is an order of 
precedence to the C++ operators. They will be executed in a certain order. Use the link
below to see the order of precedence.

[Precedence](https://www.viva64.com/media/images/content/t/Priority/image1.png)

---