# 5. Arrays

## 5.1 Introduction

We can create variables that can hold a single value. But what if we wanted a list
of variables? It would very tedious to have to declare 10 different variables if 
we needed a list that was 10 elements long.

That's where arrays come into play. With arrays, we can declare one variable that 
represents an array of elements. 

---

## 5.2 Declaring Arrays

Arrays are declared in the following fashion:

```
<variable type> <variable name> [<size>];
```

Here is some ways you might declare arrays in C++:

```C++
int numArray[100];
char charArray[100];
```

You can also initialize an array with specified elements:

```C++
int numArray[10] = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9};
```

Be aware that the indices of the array - that is, the position number of some value
contained in an array - starts at zero. This means that the first element of any array
is at position 0. Here is an example for clarification.

```C++
int numArray[10] = {2, 3, 6, 9, 10, 11, 12, 21, 72, 100};

/*
numArray[0] = 2
numArray[1] = 3
numArray[2] = 6
and so forth...
*/
```

There is one more specific thing that you need to know about arrays. The size of the array
must be known at compile-time. That is, the size of the array must be known before
you build the program. 

So this will compile:

```C++
int arr[10];
```

But this will not:

```C++
int arr[];      // Don't do this!
```

---

## 5.3 Multidimensional Arrays

If we imagine how arrays are stored in memory, we would think of arrays as a contiguous
segment of memory (a line if you will). Call this as a 1D array.

Now try to imagine a 2D array. In reality, it would still be a contiguous segment of
memory. But for all intents and purposes, imagine a 2D array as a square.

```
1D Array:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

2D Array:
11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
31, 32, 33, 34, 35,
41, 42, 43, 44, 45,
51, 52, 53, 54, 55
```

That's what a 2D array is. To initialize a 2D array, just add a second size to a
1D array. It would look something like this:

```C++
/*
You do not need to initialize your 2D array in this fashion, but it makes reading
your 2D array much easier.
*/

int arr2[3][3] = { 11, 12, 13,
                   21, 22, 23
                   31, 32, 33 };
```

The first index of a 2D array is the "row number" of the 2D array. The second index
is the "column number" of the 2D array. For example, given the above array, this is
how you might access some of its elements.

```
arr2[0][0] = 11
arr2[0][2] = 13
arr2[1][1] = 22
arr2[2][0] = 31
```

---