# 6. Loops

## 6.1 Introduction

Let us consider the topic we have just learned: arrays. Suppose I created an array
simply to store a set of items that I just wanted to print later. Well, with the tools
we currently have now, in order to print all the items in an array, we would need to
do something like this:

```C++
// Some array of numbers
int arr[10] = {21, 43, 12, 92, 95, 78, 63, 51, 36. 29};

cout << arr[0] << endl;
cout << arr[1] << endl;
cout << arr[2] << endl;
//...
cout << arr[9] << endl;
```

As you can see, this way of going through an array is very tedious and painful to write.
In addtion, if we did not know how full the array is (we know how big the array is, but 
not how many elements are occupied in it), we would not have a reliable way of going 
through an array.

What if we wanted to do a the same task repeatedly? We would have to do the same thing
there too. And just like going through array, if we the amount of times we needed to do
some set task was not known at compile-time, we would have no reliable way of performing
the repeated tasks correctly.

Both of these problems are solved with *loops*.

---

## 6.2 *while* Loops

The most basic form of a loop is what is known as a *while* loop. The code contained in 
loop continues to iterate as long as some condition is fulfilled. Here is the basic form
of this type of loop:

```C++
while <some condition>
{
    // Code to be executed on each iteration
}
```

Generally speaking, you might want to have some sort of variable to act as some sort of
indicator or condition to control how long the loop iterates. For example, if I wanted 
to iterate through a loop **num** times, it might look something like this:

```C++
int counter = 0;

while (counter < num)
{
    // Some code statements...
    counter++;
}
```

The loop above will continue to iterate until counter is equal to num. Counter will be
incremented on every iteration of the loop, thus not throwing us into an infinite loop,
or a loop that will never cease to iterate.

A *while* loop may iterate zero times. If the condition in the *while* loop is not met
initially, then the loop will not iterate at all. Consider the following piece of code:

```C++
int condition = 10;

while (condition < 10)
{
    // Some code statements...
    condition++;
}
```

Notice how the variable *condition* is initialized to the integer value 10. We know that
10 is not less than 10. So the initial check of *condition* in the loop will return false,
and thus the loop will not be entered on the first iteration.

---

## 6.3 *do-while* Loops

Consider the *while* loop again. Suppose we wanted to iterate through a section of code,
but only if a certain intial condition is met. With the tools that we currently have,
we would use a *while* loop.

But suppose we wanted a loop to iterate at least once, regardless of any variables or
conditions in the code. In this case, we need to use a *do-while* loop. A *do-while*
loop will iterate at least once before checking any variables or conditions in the code.
It looks something like this:

```C++
int counter = 0;

do
{
    // Some code statements...
    counter++;
} while (counter < 5);
```

As you may have noticed, you need to place a semicolon at the end of a *do-while* loop.
This type of loop will "do" whatever one iteration of the loop does, and then it will 
check if the condition to continue iterating is met afterwards. So in the following 
scenario:

```C++
int condition = 10;

do
{
    // Some code statements
    condition++;
} while (condition < 10);
```

The code within the loop will iterate at least once, even though the variable *condition*
is not less than 10 when entering the loop.

---

## 6.4 *for* Loops

Some of you may have noticed that all loops follow a common thread or pattern: Initialize
some condition variable, check the condition variable against some condition, and then 
update the condition variable. This leads us to a third type of loop that follows this 
pattern explicitly. It is called a *for* loop. It is declared as follows:

```C++
for (int i = 0; i < num; i++)
{
    // Some code statements
}
```

As you can see, in the parameters of the *for* loop, a condition variable is initialized
(int i = 0), the condition variable is checked against some condition (i < num), and the 
condition is updated (i++). Notice how these statements are separated by **semicolons**,
and not commas, since a *for* loop acts as three statements in one.

And like the *while* loop, a *for* loop may also iterate no times as well. A *for* loop
will check the condition first, see if it is met, and then execute any code with the 
loop body.

---