# 8. Pointers

## 8.1 Introduction

Let's go back to the to the topic of variables. As stated in an earlier chapter, when we
create a variable, we give it a name. When we use that variable name, it refers to a 
place in memory where the value for that variable is stored.

Let's do a thought experiment. Let's imagine all the memory in a computer as a long row 
of mailboxes. Each time we declare a new variable, someone claims ownership over a number
of mailboxes, depending on the size of the variable. And if the variable is given a value,
the mailbox is then filled with letters.

If the company handling these mailboxes is competent, then these mailboxes should also 
have addresses associated with them as well. With that, we now have two ways of
identifying a mailbox; we can go by whoever owns the specified mailbox, or we can use 
the addresses of the specified mailbox.

This second method of using the addresses of the mailboxes is the basis to how pointers
function in programming. Pointers "point" to where a variable is stored in memory by
referring to the address in memory in which it's stored.

---

## 8.2 Declaring and Using Pointers

First, how do we delcare a pointer variable? A pointer variable is an address, but an 
address to what type of variable? We must be able to declare a variable as a pointer as
well as declare what type of variable the pointer is pointing to. We accomplish this by 
appending the "\*" operator (the *star operator*) to a variable. Here is an example:

```C++
int* numPtr;    // Creates a integer pointer
char* chPtr;    // Creates a character pointer
```

We can also initialize a pointer to "point" to some variable when we declare it. To 
generate the address to a variable, we prepend the ampersand symbol ("&") to the
beginning of the variable that we want the address of. Here is an example:

```C++
int num = 5;            // Declare a variable and initialize it to 5.
int* numPtr = &num;     // Initialize a pointer to point to the new variable.
```

Now for the next step. We know how to declare a pointer and initialize it, but how do
we access the value that the pointer points to? It may be somewhat confusing, but we 
use the *star operator* like before, except we prepend it to the variable name. It works
as follows:

```C++
int num = 5;
int* numPtr = &num;

cout << *numPtr;           // Follow numPtr to print out 5.
```

---