# 9. Functions

## 9.1 Introduction

Imagine you are working at an industrial factory that builds cars. Let's also say that
this factory has embraced the practice of Fordism and thus utilizes the assembly line.
As a worker, that would mean you would not be building an entire car, but a simply a part
of it. For example, all you do in the assembly process is attach the front right tire. 
You never touch any other part of the car other than the front right tire.

If we were to express your job in pseudocode, it would look something like this:

1. Attach front right tire.
2. Apply nuts and bolts.
3. Screw in nuts and bolts until tire is secure.

Simple right? Except there is one problem. This would be pretty awful to write a daily 
production of cars. Of course, we could place this pseudocode in a loop, but what if we
needed to attach the front right tire earlier or later in the assembly process for some
other reason? We would need to rewrite all of the pseudocode in order to attach the 
front right tire in some other place in the assembly line.

Now, this pseudocode is short, but imagine a scenario where we might be dealing with a 
lengthy algorithm in a program. It would be a pain to have to copy and paste all of that
code somewhere else, not to mention that it would make our code unnecessarily long. That's
where functions come into play.

---

## 9.2 Declaring and Creating Functions

To begin, let's first look at how to declare a function in C++.

```C++
int someFunction(int num)
{
    int a = num;
    // Insert code statements

    return a;
}
```

Functions have 5 basic components, as shown above.

First is the **return type**. This identifies the type of variable that will be returned 
after the function is called or used. This variable type can range from an int to a bool 
or to a char. However, functions cannot return strings, since strings are not a *primitive*
*data type*. In other words, strings are too complicated for a function to pass back.

Also know that a function may not return a variable. We identify these types of functions by
giving them the return type *void*. 

Second is the **function name**. This is simply the name of your function, and it is the
keyword by which you will be able to call the function.

Third are the **function arguments** or **parameters**. These are values that will be passed
to the function that the function will use when you call it. For example, if you have a
function that adds, you might pass two numbers that the function will add together.

Fourth is the **code body**. This is the set of code statements that the function will execute
when it is called. These statements are no different from normal code statements.

Fifth is the **return statement**. Remember talking about the *return type* earlier? This is 
where we specifically identify what value will be returned from a function. And yes, the 
value stated in the return statement must match the type identified in the function declaration.

## 9.3 Function Parameters

If we were to take a closer look at the function parameters themselves, one might discover
something perculiar. Considering following example:

```C++
int add_two(int a, int b, int c, int d, int result)
{
    result = a + b;

    return c + d;
}
```

In this example, what would be the value of 'result'? Would 'result' have a value? Would that
value be a + b like the code suggests?

The short answer - No. result would still be undefined, because variables in C++, by default, are
*passed-by-value*. If a variable is *passed-by-value*, it means that the variable itself is not 
passed to the function, but rather, a copy of it is passed instead. So, considering the following 
example:

```C++
int add_1(int a)
{
    a += 1;
    return a
}

int main()
{
    int num = 1;

    int result = add_1(num)

    return 0;
}

```

The value of 'result' will be 2, but value of 'num' will still be 1, even though it was incremented
in the function. Again, that's because the function copies the variable 'num' and passes it to the
function. So any changes to the value 'num' will only affect the copy, and not the original variable.
Afterwards, when the function ends, the copy falls out of scope (think of this as 'the variable falls out of relevance'), and the copy disappears.

But what if we wanted to chnage the function parameters? What if we wanted to return more than one
value from a function call? To do this, we need to *pass-by-reference*. As you might guess, when we
*pass-by-reference*, we do not copy the variables in the parameters; instead, we pass the parameters
themselves to the function. To indicate a *pass-by-reference*, we use the '&' symbol, like so:

```C++
int return2(int a, int b, int& c)
{
    c = b;
    return a;
}

int main()
{
    int num1 = 1;
    int num2 = 2;

    int result1 = 0;
    int result2 = 0;

    result1 = return2(num1, num2, result2);

    return 0;
}
```

Here, we use the '&' symbol to indicate a *pass-by-reference*, so the end result of this particular
function call, 'result1' would be 1 and 'result2' would be 2. 'a' and 'b' are still *passed-by-value*,
so those values will not be changed even if directly edited them. However, there is one exception to 
this rule. Everything is passed by value by default, except arrays. Arrays are passed by reference by 
default. This is because arrays can become vary large, and copying such arrays can be expensive to 
perform.

Extension: If you are curious as to how this works, it actually alludes to something covered in an
earlier chapter. If you recall, in an earlier chapter, we covered something called 'pointers'. And if
you have really good memory, the '&' symbol had a special meaning there; it generated a pointer. In
this case, it's use is no different. If we generate a pointer to a variable in a function parameter
list, we generate the address of the variable passed to the function. So, in reality, everything is 
passed by value. If everything passed to the function is a copy, a copy of an address is still the 
address of the actual variable. So even though the address has been 'copied', the variable in 
question is not a copy, and thus it will be edited when changed in the function itself.

---